Python Programming Basics Document

Python is a high-level, interpreted programming language. It is popular because it is easy to read, beginner-friendly, and widely used in software development, automation, data analysis, artificial intelligence, machine learning, web development, scripting, and backend development.

Python files usually have the .py extension. A Python program can be executed using the python command in the terminal.

Example:
python app.py

Variables:
A variable is used to store data. In Python, you do not need to declare the data type manually.

Example:
name = "Arun"
age = 28

Data Types:
Python has several common data types:
1. int - used for whole numbers
2. float - used for decimal numbers
3. str - used for text
4. bool - used for True or False values
5. list - used to store multiple items in order
6. tuple - used to store multiple items that cannot be changed
7. dict - used to store key-value pairs
8. set - used to store unique values

List:
A list is an ordered collection of items. Lists are mutable, which means we can change them after creation.

Example:
numbers = [10, 20, 30, 40]

Dictionary:
A dictionary stores data in key-value pairs.

Example:
student = {
    "name": "Arun",
    "course": "Python",
    "level": "Beginner"
}

Conditional Statements:
Conditional statements are used to make decisions in a program.

Example:
age = 18

if age >= 18:
    print("Eligible")
else:
    print("Not eligible")

Loops:
Loops are used to repeat a block of code.

For Loop Example:
for number in [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]:
    print(number)

While Loop Example:
count = 1

while count <= 5:
    print(count)
    count = count + 1

Functions:
A function is a reusable block of code. It helps avoid repetition and makes code cleaner.

Example:
def greet(name):
    return "Hello " + name

result = greet("Arun")
print(result)

Modules:
A module is a Python file that contains reusable code. Python also has built-in modules such as math, os, random, and datetime.

Example:
import math

print(math.sqrt(16))

File Handling:
Python can read and write files.

Example:
with open("data.txt", "r") as file:
    content = file.read()

Exception Handling:
Exception handling is used to handle errors without stopping the entire program.

Example:
try:
    number = int("abc")
except ValueError:
    print("Invalid number")

Object-Oriented Programming:
Python supports object-oriented programming. A class is a blueprint, and an object is an instance of a class.

Example:
class Student:
    def __init__(self, name):
        self.name = name

student1 = Student("Arun")
print(student1.name)

Python in AI:
Python is widely used in artificial intelligence and machine learning because it has many useful libraries such as NumPy, pandas, scikit-learn, TensorFlow, PyTorch, LangChain, ChromaDB, and OpenAI SDK.

Python in RAG Applications:
In Retrieval-Augmented Generation applications, Python is used to read documents, split text into chunks, create embeddings, store embeddings in vector databases like ChromaDB, retrieve relevant chunks, and send context to a language model for answering questions.

Summary:
Python is a beginner-friendly and powerful programming language. It is used in many fields including automation, backend development, data science, AI, machine learning, and RAG-based GenAI applications.